+++
title = "Three Arguments for the Elimination of DRM"
date = 2021-02-18
+++

&nbsp;

---

Today, the majority of the digital media content - including films, books,
video games and some music - that users can "purchase" online comes encumbered
with Digital Rights Management (DRM) systems. DRM systems are technologies,
based on encryption and generally implemented in software shipped with products
or services, that are meant to impose restrictions on how the user interacts
with or uses digital media content. They are used as a measure intended to try
to stop the illegal and unauthorized distribution of digital copies of
copyright protected material on the Internet.

Well-known companies like Google, Amazon, Apple, Netflix, Spotify, Steam and
Kobo all make use of DRM software to protect most or all of the copyrighted
content on their platforms. Yet, not many users are aware of the existence of
DRM. DRM prevents users from making copies of digital files, transferring them
to different personal devices, or accessing them using different devices or
applications that would have been able to open them if it was not for DRM.
Therefore, typically, content that is "purchased" - more precisely, made
accessible through authentication to a certain user for an undefined amount of
time - on one platform can only be accessed through the services provided or
supported by that platform.

Many objections have been raised to the widespread use of DRM systems. This article focuses on three main points.

### DRM Puts the User's Privacy and Security at Risk

Digital security is already a difficult problem to solve. Frequently, new
vulnerabilities and security holes are discovered in all kinds of
software that many people use on a daily basis. DRM software often introduces
new security risks, potentially leaving the user's device vulnerable to
attacks. This is particularly worrisome, since DRM software often has direct
access to highly sensitive data, such as credentials, purchase details, and
many kinds of personal information. While the potentiality of unintentional
vulnerabilities in DRM software is problematic, what is more alarming is that
DRM software can contain intentional security holes, as was the case in the
Sony rootkit scandal. Since these kinds of implementations are closed-source,
and the disassembly of proprietary binaries may be obstructed in many ways,
there is no good way of making sure that DRM systems are unmalicious and/or
secure.

Even if it were possible to ensure code security, DRM software could still be
fundamentally problematic in terms of privacy, because of how it fundamentally
operates. DRM systems do not specifically block illegal or unauthorized access;
this approach is not feasible. Instead, they block all access to a DRM protected
file by default, and then they allow access to certain users on a platform, if
and when they are able to authenticate, and prove that they have paid for access.
This means that the software has to have at least some information about the user,
and/or access to locations in the file system where it can store and retrieve
cryptographic keys, and perhaps credentials. This also means that private
consumption is not really private if the material in question is protected by
DRM. Moreover, in many cases, the information that is collected is much more
than the minimum amount that is necessary.

### Interoperability and DRM Do Not Go Together

Interoperability is another issue when it comes to implementing DRM systems. A
digital file encoded in an open format compatible with any program and any
device that can open it cannot be used in, or even transferred to, other
"unsupported" programs and devices, simply because the DRM software does not
allow it. This is true even if the target device or program has a different DRM
implementation of its own; DRM systems do not work with each other, and the
files have to be transferred from a central server anyway. In fact, in the
early and middle 2000s - when DRM systems were not as prominent as they are
today, and their shortcomings and potential alternatives were more openly
discussed - interoperability between different DRM systems, among many other
flaws, was a big concern. Many experts have stated that DRM interoperability is
virtually impossible to achieve, as it introduces large-scale security hazards,
and a need for quick and seamless cooperation between competing entities
whenever something malfunctions.

Nowadays, discussions on interoperability seem to have come to a halt. Numerous
implementations of DRM systems exist, and ventures for an open standard have
largely been abandoned. Meanwhile, the lack of interoperability only hurts the
consumers who are willing to pay for digital media and to make online
"purchases" through legal means. The situation also introduces the risk of
losing access to acquired digital material in case the user wishes to leave the
platform or service from which he/she has "purchased" digital content, or the
service decides to disallow access to some or all of its users, citing various
reasons. As a result of this, some companies enjoy a huge amount of control
over the distribution of digital media, as well as intellectual content, ideas
and criticisms. Content that is only available on a single platform can
effectively be banned, and "purchased" material can be rendered inaccessible
through software updates. This is rarely the case with hardcover books or DVDs.

### DRM Does Not Prevent/Reduce the Illegal Use of Copyrighted Works

Finally, there is no good reason to believe that DRM protection reduces the
illegal distribution and use of digital media content. DRM systems have been in
prevalent use globally for at least 15 years. Yet, digital piracy has not died.
While subscription based services that also employ DRM protections - like
Netflix, Spotify, and their competitors - have significantly decreased the
demand for pirated content in their respective industries for a certain amount
of time, this effect was arguably caused by the well-integrated user experience
that they were able to offer to the paying members of their platforms.

In fact, the implementation of DRM itself more than likely increases the
motivation for piracy, and decreases the amount of legal purchases. This is
because DRM discourages the legitimate buyer, but does nothing significant to
stop illegal copying and distribution. Many works that are distributed online
bundled with DRM software can easily be purchased in other digital or
non-digital formats that do not have DRM, and can easily be copied. Moreover,
there are many ways to decrypt DRM protected files, or to "extract" the
protected content through methods like stream-ripping. In addition, there
exists a fair amount of empirical evidence, which shows that many users are
more likely to purchase digital media content when it is DRM-free.

---

DRM systems have many drawbacks that should concern the end user, and provide no apparent benefit to the parties combatting unauthorized copying and distribution.
While they might have seemed like a potential remedy for piracy concerns in the early 2000s, in reality they have become part of the problem as opposed to a feasible solution.
