+++
title = "Thoughts on Feature Phones and KaiOS"
date = 2020-11-25
+++

&nbsp;

<div class="note"><small>As of November 2022, I began using a more popular and more capable mobile electronic telecommunication device, A.K.A. a smartphone. This article is not updated.</small></div>

Feature phones seem to be making a bit of a comeback.
I happen to have one of these devices, which I have used for over a year, and I would like to ramble a bit about my experience with it.

---

### Why Consider Using a Feature Phone?

These devices sit somewhere in between older cell phones and modern
smartphones. They have the push-button interface which has mostly fallen out of
fashion in favor of touchscreens, even though they borrow some of their design
elements from contemporary touchscreen devices (which really only makes it
harder to push the buttons, and effectively use the device, but more on that
later). Despite that, it is possible to gain internet access with them using
the 3G/4G network technologies. If the phone is running an operating system
called KaiOS - which, as of the writing of this article, is the third most
popular mobile operating system in the world out of nowhere,
running on more than 100 million devices - it is also possible to send and
receive e-mail, check the weather forecast, or use popular services/
applications such as Facebook, Whatsapp and Youtube, even though they are not
fully-featured.

There are some reasons people choose to own and use one of these devices over a
smartphone. First of all, they are fairly cheap because of their hardware with
much lower specifications, but they aim to provide most of the features that
the regular user would expect to get from a smartphone. This is why many people
who can not afford high-end smartphones choose to buy feature phones "with
smart features". Secondly, they have significantly improved battery life
compared to many lower-end smartphones, even though they can not compete with older
phones, which could go weeks without a recharge. Those were the days!
Another important point to mention is that they are <u>not exactly smartphones.</u>
They just offer a user experience that sits somewhere between old "dumb" phones and
new smartphones.
I believe that this is of particular importance, since there
exists a growing number of people who want to move away from the use of
smartphones - or "smart" devices in general - because they think that it is,
for the most part, detrimental. In this regard, breaches in digital safety,
security and privacy come to mind, as well as concerns about the general
direction in which technologically enhanced societal living is headed.
Although if you are too concerned about all of these things, feature phones are probably not the way to go.

### What to Expect from the Device Itself

I actually did not switch from using a smartphone to using a feature phone; I
switched to a feature phone, because my older cell phone stopped working. In
light of that, my expectations were quite low. What I needed was a small and
durable device, which could reliably make phone calls, send text messages and
not cause any distractions. I settled on an Alcatel 3088. It is not my
intention to present a detailed review of this product, however I would like to
mention a few points.

Feature phone devices, while being much smaller than smartphones, are
significantly larger in size compared to older phones, and I don't feel like
this is justified. However, what is really bizarre is that this phone in
particular looks and feels a lot like a smartphone. The front and the back
sides are almost completely flat, and the screen - in my opinion - is much
bigger than it needs to be. This choice makes it unnecessariliy hard to get a
good grip of the device in order to push the buttons in an ergonomically sound
way, and the whole effort to achieve a more "modern" look and feel comes at a
great cost to usability. Many newer feature phones actually exhibit similar
design elements, whereas with older cell phones, one could see that
practicality was a bigger concern.

### The Operating System: KaiOS

Nowadays, many feature phones come with KaiOS preinstalled, which is a
web-based mobile operating system, forked from B2G OS (which in turn is a fork
of the discontinued Firefox OS by Mozilla) and based on the Linux kernel. In my
experience, it is not the most stable operating system out there. The
performance in general is subpar. Updates tend to make it even worse, and the
fact that it runs web applications written in Javascript really doesn't help.
Perhaps most importantly, it is largely a privacy nightmare.

The growing interest in "non-smart" solutions for daily communications by
digital means is in part due to the increasing number of privacy-conscious
users in light of the current state of data collection and surveillance
practices by a handful of big tech companies. Unfortunately, in this regard,
KaiOS is as poor a choice as it gets. It comes preinstalled with a plethora of
applications including Facebook and the KaiOS Store as well as the Google
Assistant, Google Maps, Google Search and Youtube applications developed by
Google, from which KaiOS has received a $22M investment. Moreover, the user
does not have root access on the phone by default, and the Google applications
can not be removed, even with root access, unless you are willing to basically
hack into your own phone, and remove the said applications every time after the
phone updates and reinstalls them. I myself have completed this process once,
removing the Google applications which were never used and/or configured, and
effectively doubled the battery life on the phone as a result. I leave it to
the reader to form his or her opinion on what the purposes of these
applications are, and on which tasks they could be performing on a personal
device, in their uninitialized states, without the express consent of the user.
Privacy-wise, the only advantage of phones running KaiOS is that they usually
have removable batteries, unlike most smartphones.

Other difficulties might arise when trying to interface with a KaiOS phone,
which is unfortunate as there is a compelling argument that this should have
been prioritized, since users might more often that not need to connect to
other devices in order to extract data or perform various tasks, given the
computational limitations of feature phones. KaiOS is similar to Google's
Android mobile operating system in how it tries to facilitate secure user
interactions, and borrows some of its implementations. Normally, users can only
download and install applications using the preinstalled application store.
"Sideloading" applications from another device is an involved process, which
requires multiple software tools, and may or may not be achievable depending on
the device. In order for it to work, the device in question must be capable of
enabling USB debugging through the use of adb (Android Debug Bridge). It is
also needed to download a very old version of Pale Moon or Firefox (a bad idea
for various reasons), or download the KaiOS simulator, which is available on
Linux but not on BSDs or the various versions of Windows and Macintosh
operating systems. Transferring files from a KaiOS phone is also complicated.
The system does not allow users to send files that are bigger than 10 MB over
bluetooth or e-mail. The device storage can only be accessed through the Media
Transfer Protocol, which is a solid security measure to have, but it requires
an MTPfs installation on the connected computer.

All things considered, it would be fair to say that KaiOS users are unable to
make full use of the many features that feature phones have to offer. Users are
not allowed to have root access on their own devices, remove certain
applications or install others, and they are locked out of most of the
filesystem. Feature phones, while they have their drawbacks, are remarkably
capable devices for their prices. However, they are also crippled by the software
that powers them.

### Final Thoughts

Getting yourself a feature phone, perhaps with KaiOS on it, might be a tempting idea
for various reasons. Despite all the aforementioned points, for individuals who
can not afford a smartphone at the moment but absolutely need to use services
like Whatsapp, KaiOS-powered feature phones might be the best bet.
Nevertheless, it is crucial to be aware of the disadvantages. For individuals
who just want to stop using smartphones because they feel that they are
addicted, and that their productivity and social life are hindered, a device
like this might again be beneficial, because it would simply be unable to steal
the attention of the user for extended periods of time - like smartphones are
designed to do - due to its limitations. Despite that, feature phones still do
have many features that could potentially be time-consuming. Using an older
phone - or not using a mobile phone at all - should prove to be a much better
option in this regard. For privacy reasons, it would be safe to assume that
KaiOS phones are in no way better than smartphones running Android or iOS.
